---
layout: post
title: Ctrl-Alt-Delete Your QA Team
feature-img: "img/wood_black.png"
---

There is no nice or easy way to say this but having a dedicated software QA team is a waste of time, energy and money. This is especially true if your QA team is composed of non-engineers. I am not trying to be facetious or provocative, I am saying this having been a part of small startups to very large Fortune 500 companies organizations that had a separate QA team. These experience left me questioning the the purpose of having a QA team at. We have all heard and learned from our teachers, peers, text books, and numerous consultants and speaker that the purpose of having a QA team is "to catch and prevent software defects before a product or service is delivered to clients" but is this really true? What would happen to the quality of our software if we got rid of the QA team and pushed quality assurance responsibility back to engineering?

There isn't a lot of research in this area. The closes is [The Economic Impacts of Inadequate Infrastructure for Software Testing](https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/director/planning/report02-3.pdf) repot published by *National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)* in 2002. In this study NIST said nothing about needing a separate QA team only the need to test software and improve our testing infrastructure. The NIST also made the following interesting observation:
> All developers of financial services software agreed that an improved system for testing was needed. They said that an improved system would be able to track a bug back to the point where it was introduced and then determine how that bug influenced the rest of the production process. **Their ideal testing infrastructure would consist of close to real time testing where testers could remedy problems that emerge right away rather than waiting until a product is fully
assembled. The major benefits developers cited from an improved infrastructure were direct cost reduction in the development process and a decrease in post-purchase customer support.** An additional benefit that respondents thought would emerge from an improved testing infrastructure is increased confidence in the quality of the product they produce and ship. The major selling characteristic of the products they create is the certainty that that product will accomplish
a particular task. Because of the real time nature of their products, the reputation loss can be great (p. 21).

It is pretty hard to argue with a real-time testing infrastructure being ideal. It is equally hard to argue that having a separate QA team helps us realize this ideal. In fact having separate engineering and QA teams creates an [accountability gap](https://www.partnersinleadership.com/insights-publications/the-accountability-gap/) and essentially turns quality assurance into something aspirational rather than a commitment that must be met.

Good engineers take pride in writing quality code and believed that it is their responsibility to insure the code they delivered meets requirements, performed as expected, extensible, and maintainable. Good QA testers equally take pride to insure that they discover and report as many bugs as possible. Of course engineers and QA testers don't always catch bugs prior to the software being released. The question then is who is responsible for quality assurance when things don't go as planned? The engineers? The QA testers? Or both? If the engineers are responsible for quality assurance then why do we need a separate QA team? Why not directly assign quality assurance to the engineering team? If the QA team is on the other hand responsible for quality assurance does that absolve the engineers who acutely write the code from producing quality workmanship? If both engineering and the QA team are responsible for quality assurance which team do you then hold accountable for quality issues? I would hope the engineering team as they produced the software in the first place.

It's comforting to have a QA team validating the work of engineers. Experience shows, however, that QA teams are rarely involved in development decision making process and requires guidance from engineering with respect to understanding the product features and functionality and how to test them. This sort of arrangement isn't an equitable arrangement. Why encumber your engineering team with this additional level of indirect responsibility? Or put your QA team in a constant position of playing catchup? Let the engineering team own quality assurance and hold them accountable.
